Today is a day of celebration for many Americans. If you haven't heard of
this unofficial holiday, it's called Juneteenth. And it commemorates the
emancipation of African Americans from slavery. Juneteenth has been a legal
holiday in texas for a decade. But now this regional celebration is spreading.
Different areas of the country celebrate in various ways and on various
days, depending on when the slaves got word they were free. William H. Wiggins
Jr. is the author of Oh Freedom: a Book on African American emancipation
celebrations is also associate Professor of Afro American studies at Indiana
University. And we're pleased to have him join us to talk about this
celebration. What's juneteenth? juneteenth commemorates a date in 1865 june
19th when General Garden Granger, a Union general landed at Galveston Texas
and ostesibly went up into East Texas, spreading the word that uh the
slaveholders had to free the slaves. And this one time event was so traumatic
that it triggered the celebrations which we see to this very day, it began in
texas? began in in Texas, East Texas, uh Western Louisiana, southwest Arkansas
and southern Oklahoma. That's the uh initial celebration region. Where was it
spread to? It is been carried, as we would say cultural baggage by uh say the
tom Bradleys and the John Matheses who have gone west to California. Uh So
it is now celebrated in uh in Oakland, Los Angeles, Richmond, California, all
those places wherever they are Texas, it's a holiday in Texas. It is an
official state holiday than any other state that it's an official state
holiday. No, uh in fact, um in my study, uh there was a constant theme with
all the various states, for example January one which commemorates uh the
emancipation proclamation 1863. Uh All these other dates, there was always
uh an effort to have a national have recognition, official recognition, but
this is the first, I think the closest we come to that would be february one
which is celebrated in philadelphia national freedom day. And they got a
proclamation uh from uh then President Truman to recognize that day it's
commemorated, the passage of the 13th amendment, but this is the first
official day. And then of course I say in my book that uh it is that impetus
which really uh gave uh support and direction to the martin Luther King
Junior national holiday, which which just came here recently, how did we
celebrate juneteenth? Well okay there are where it the party? Alright, OK. There are
basically three uh types of of of celebrations that we have in some cases
it's it's pure uh purely good time in which it would be similar to the
american picnic, july 4th in which you would have uh particular cuisine, the
barbecue, uh the red soda water watermelon uh baseball and uh gets better and better alright
things like that the other would go to the other extreme in which you would
uh have a uh a church sort of celebration here. Uh the individual would come
together, that would be the reading of the Emancipation proclamation. And I
might say here a very dramatic reading, not a simple factual sort of thing, but
very embellished reading of the uh the emancipation proclamation and address
which sort of ties together where we come from, where we want to go and where
we're at this moment. Uh And that's it. And then the other would be one to
combine the two where you would have picnics, but you'd also have uh some
sort of what kind of program? What's the freedom document? Alright the
freedom document. Uh Well there are really two, there is the emancipation
proclamation uh which uh Lincoln issued in uh 1863 january one. And the
other uh is is this executive order that uh Garden Granger brought with him
to texas telling the owners that hey you have to free these people are
compensated them for their word, was there across the south. Um resistance to the
idea. I mean even after the emancipation of proclamation even or border
states, places like texas where you needed to have generals ride in and
enforce this proclamation? very definitely because uh texas at the time was
still a territory and many of the slave owners, slaveholders had migrated
from the old south, the old Dominion from uh as far east Virginia, the
Carolinas Georgia and had gone into texas with that very thought in mind. And
they saw the saw the reading handwriting on the wall that may be slaves, They
would have to give up their property and they moved out to hold on as long as
they could, so they weren't gonna pay any attention to the emancipation
proclamation. Unless you send somebody in to remind them of what the
proclamation said, correct, It's had a kind of ebb and flow as I as I read in
the sense that it's it began, and then it sort of went into an ebb, why was
that what caused this? Well, because uh as Doctor King has said, uh the the Afro
american dream is deeply rooted in the american dream. And I think you will
find an atrophying of the celebrations at those moments in which the push for
integration are. The success was was was very high. So for example, after
World War, when we come out of World War Two, and uh the war to end all Wars
and the Double V campaign that a lot of the person said, hey I fought for
America, I am an american. We should celebrate july 4th the american day. And
then with the rise of nationalism and the sense of of celebration of uh Afro
american african american culture. Then the celebrations began to to rise
again. So that the celebrations have really sort of reflected the mood
within the larger african american community, Oh freedom Afro american
emancipation celebrations by Professor Wiggins we'll be back and I want you to
continue to stay with us. 